Side 3 equipment section continued.
The following sections of organizing are called
44, radar on lower end, the radio on lower end,
radar, IFF, RCM, sonar, functional components.
Each of these sections initiated procurement
requests using one, allowance list established
by installation and maintenance, two, equipment
characteristics set up by C&O, three, data on
number of shifts to be equipped, four, training
school manuals, land lease directives, and so on.
The stock maintenance section was also organized
to handle items common to all of these sections,
insulators, cables, headphones, and switches.
In the fall of 1944, an audit group was set up,
proposed by a number of officers from business
fields. This group reviewed controls, accurate
requirements, and so forth, and it all instituted
119 cancellations of equipment worth a total of
$70 million between December 1944 and March 1945.
In October 1944, Unified Requirements
Determining Procedure was set up to eliminate
duplicate requirements and guesswork. Under
this Procedure, one requirements card was
established for each type of equipment or each
item to be procured by the Radio Division.
The system of allowance of battle damage
continues to occasion unbalanced production.
However, the use of flat percentage was not
abolished immediately. For example, it was used
exclusively for sonar up to 1945, but it was still
used in May 1945 for new types of equipment for
which no experience existed. Page 281,
this is. Page 283. Bureau
of Ships, Electronics Design Division, procured
electronics equipment for itself and the Bureau
of Aeronautics, as well as the Marine Corps and the
Maritime Commission of the Vietnamese. Procured
for these agencies in line with the Navy policy of
centering all procurement of the largest use of
the given type. I'm not going to discuss the
details. Page 284, the Bureau of Ships prepared
detailed specifications in consultation with
the Bureau of Aeronautics, negotiated the price,
directed production effort, and approved all
commitments affecting design and production.
The Bureau of Ships also initiated the design and
development of new electronics equipment, the
Bureau of Aeronautics paying the direct cost. And
it says that if the business did not procure from
the Bureau of Autonomous, it would have provided
that Bureau with technical advice. Altogether,
however, the division procured about
nine-tenths of the Navy's electronics
requirements. This system gave one bureau an
overall view of the situation with respect to
production, price, component, and labor, while
eliminating duplication of many functions. The
disadvantage was the delay in processing
procurements through several technical
bureaus. Inseparate authority and
responsibility in continually obscuring the
status of procurement in the two bureaus.
Practice, however, of having Burea designate the
contract to reduce defectiveness of provided
procurement for the chief advantage of having
bureauships handle Burea procurements. or that
the former could then consider from an overall
point of view factors such as keeping contractors
in business, comparative pricing, labor
situation, and so forth. Theoretically, the
function of selecting the contractor,
negotiating price, and awarding the contract
belonged to Buce Santa, which before the war
performed this function for the use of
procurement other than electronics. Though
electronics have the technical complexity and
rapid technical development, the huge
acceleration of procurements placed a job beyond
the technical competence of the Bureau of
Suppliers and Accounts. Authorities for
initiating procurement requests in the
electronics division came from CNO 1, either in
correspondence setting up ship or shore
allowances and requesting specific equipment,
or 2, in requests for equipment for claimant ships
and so forth, resulting from CNO directives.
Before July 44, procurement requests were
prepared by specialist sections of the
installation and maintenance branch.
Procurement requests after that were prepared by
the cognizant equipment section, radar, and so
forth.
It's interesting, on page 288, the lack of pricing
experience, the need for speed, the problem for
rapid changes, and specifications were dealt
with by using acceptance of the negotiations up to
July 1944. Either letters of intent or contracts
specifying maximum price with later
redetermination down but only. The letter of
intent described all known specifications in the
name of ceiling price and so forth. In July 1944,
there were nearly 500 letters of intent
outstanding to the value of nearly a billion
dollars and 300 maximum price contracts.
Parenthetically, I don't believe this applied to
RMD, but on page 289 it says, cost plus fixed fee
contracts were rarely used. Manufacturers
opposed them, and the Navy cost inspection
service was not large enough. This is King Cooper
speaking. I think that they did use cost plus fixed
fee on some of the receipts. Another interesting
comment on 290. The dearth of firms with
experience in facilities made it necessary
during 1942 and 43 to rely almost entirely on the
very large firms. Thus, the production report
lists only 44 prime contractors in November 1942,
and the largest 14 firms of which held 92% of the
dollar volume. On page 311, after describing how
they had to change from sending equipment to a
specific ship, which might be some equipment that
stayed long time in storage, On 3-11, the
bombardment continues. It was decided,
therefore, to create so-called pools of
electronic apparatus in all naval districts
requiring radio, radar, and sonar materials.
These pools were set up in early 1943, 1942 for
radar, under cognizance of the radio material
officer by the industrial manager. Materials
were shipped to the pools under requirements set
up by the RMO. The material was not marked for
specific vessels except in special cases. The RMO
was to allocate the stocks according to his own
judgment, keeping in mind the need for balance in
new construction and maintenance needs. The
placing in pools and Navy yards and Navy supply
depots made the electronic equipment available
for the first ship arriving on the period, which
added precedence high enough to claim that. For
example, a DD would have precedence over a YP. On
the other hand, this system had the defect that
each claimant regarded the entire pool as his own,
For example, the Naval Supply Depot at
Mechanicsburg had large stocks of TCS's placed
there for various claimants. Section 6 claimants
shipped against it and the stock ran out quickly.
This kind of situation was met in the summer of 1943
by C&O setting up precedence categories in place
of the pool system for equipment for various
classes of ships and for various other uses,
Marine Corps, amphibious, advanced base, and so
forth. The pool was divided into four categories,
new construction controlled by Bureau of Ships,
maintenance ships controlled by Forces of the
Flood, Shore station is controlled by Bureau of
Ships. Advanced base is controlled by SIGPAC and
SIGPAC jointly. Later, the fifth category was set
up consisting of material removed from shipment
stations. This category was given to the Bureau of
Ships for reassignment in category 1 to 4. In order
to apply this category system, the radio division
thereupon organized the assignment section,
which uses CNO directors as a guide in assigning
the total estimated production of each type of the
various claimant sections. I'm trying here to get
the information that set up Tommy Austin, Tommy
Rogers, under which I worked at Pearl. Page 313,
the establishment of the pool system also made it
necessary, at least desirable, to assign a
special personnel to the yards with the technical
knowledge to receive, issue, and store
electronics apparatus. In almost complexity of
electronics apparatus and parts, there were
5,000 types of capacitor, an equal number of
resistor types, and 2,000 glasses of vacuum
tubes, made it impossible for ordinary naval
storekeepers and suppliers to handle radio
equipment. The supply officer for radio was
accordingly set up to help the radio material
officer, RMO, with the technical aspects of
installation
and maintenance. Page 314. The principal pools
were located along the central and west coast of
the Navy Yard and other Navy establishments where
material could be located or installed aboard
vessels. In addition, radio pools were located at
principal and advanced bases such as Pearl Harbor
and the Nile Zone and Guam. Several factors had
complicated the problem of establishing
completely adequate pools. There had always been
shortages of certain special types of critical
materials, and this shortage was accentuated by
the rapid technical development that made types
obsolete often before the time they were
produced. In addition, the fleet and the standard
of war moved frequently and rapidly. By the time
bases like Nubia and New Guinea had been built, a
fleet operation had descended 1,000 miles north.
A major movement from east to west coast of
continental pools was called for by the collapse
of Germany and the concentration of the war in the
Pacific.
315. Difficulties with actually getting,
installing, and maintaining equipment was
enormous. Page 320. Approximately 3,000
Approximately 3,000 naval vessels of all types
and sizes were completely equipped with delicate
and expensive radio communication equipment
during the last year of the war.
Thinking of Red Bacon and the other engineers, the
story of the field engineering services and the
installation and maintenance branch for the
period of June 40 to June 1945 was the story of
expansion and extension to meet the needs of the
Navy. In June of 1940, there was no field
engineering service. In October 1941, the first
field engineering service contract was led. It
proved so successful that contracts had been led
to cover most electronic equipment. By June 1945,
there were approximately 1,000 factory field
engineers, and it totaled a cost of over $1 million
per month. The anti-submarine warfare engineers
reached a zenith of 65 engineers in November 1944.
This group tapered off toward elimination on 1
June 1945, its function being taken over by the
Navy. The Electronic Fuel Services Group
consisted of 250 engineers in August 1945.
This is an indication of how the printing went up.
In 1940, there was one periodical, the Radio and
Sound Bulletin, issued from the radio division.
By 1945, the publication section issued seven
periodicals, published 50 books, and each month
approved 64 equipment instruction books and
supervised distribution of 80,000 copies.
On page 327 is a chart of such radio program, chart
24, 29, which is dramatic in its growth. That ends
this particular description, Bureau of Ships
World War II, volume 4. And we go into Crossroads,
beginning on page 329. Less than a year after the
devastation of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the eyes
and ears of the world turned toward a little atoll
in the middle of the Pacific Ocean to discover just
how cataclysmic this explosion of splitting
atoms could be. While the results of the two atomic
bomb tests conducted at the Bikini Atoll on 1 July
and 25 July 1946 are still not firmly Fully
determined, while much of the information
remains of a classified nature, it is possible to
discuss in general terms this operation's
crossroads in which the Bureau of Ships played
such an important
role. Detail account of this incredible
operation, which is contained in Joint Task Force
One. I'll repeat that. Since the historical
report, Atomic Bomb Timothy,
Abel and Baker Operations Crossroads of Director
of Ship Material, Joint Task Force One, contains a
complete detailed account of this incredible
operation. This study will confine itself to
unclassified excerpts of that report and to
general comments which may serve to unify the
parts.
On 331, On 20 June 1945, when the European War was
ended and the Pacific War was approaching its
climactic phase, Vice Admiral E.L. Cochrane,
Chief of the Bureau of Ships and Vice Admiral, then
Rear Admiral G.F. Hussey, Chief of the Bureau of
Ordnance, addressed a joint letter to the Chief of
Naval Operations proposing a comprehensive
program for testing high explosives against
merchant and warship hawks, captured enemy
vessels and United States Navy combatant ships
about to be stricken from the active list. It was
decided to go beyond the model studies and
full-scale caisson tests, which were normally
carried out by the two bureaus. This proposal for,
quote, controlled destructive testing and a
planned program to elicit fundamental
information on damage to ship-like structures by
high explosives, end quote, met with approval.
The two bureaus and their research agencies sped
up the planning, which has already been done to
carry out this program. Meanwhile, other forces
were at work. In the New Mexico desert near
Almagordo on 16 July 1945, scientists of the
Manhattan District secretly carried out the
Trinity Test with the first explosion of the
atomic bomb, which has been under civilian and
military development since July of 1939, when
Einstein and other scientists brought the
military potentialities of such a weapon to the
attention of President Roosevelt. On 5 August,
only three weeks after this test, the first
military atomic bomb exploded over Hiroshima.
And a few days later, another atomic bomb exploded
over Nagasaki, hastening the Pacific War to its
close. The Japanese, faced with this new terror as
well as imminent, invasion surrendered
unconditionally on 14 August, nine days after the
first atomic bomb had been dropped. Even before
technical personnel made their studies in Japan,
reports of damage at Hiroshima and Nagasaki
offered conclusive proof, if any were needed, of
the tremendous military potentialities of this
new weapon.
On 28 August, the Chief of Bureau of Ships, Vice
Admiral Cochrane, informed his design and
research agencies, which were planning new
programs of underwater explosion work with
conventional explosives, that the Bureau of
Ships, quote, must be prepared to undertake
broad-scale experiments with the atomic bomb. On
1 October, Vice Admiral Cochrane and Vice Admiral
Hussey sent another letter to the Chief of Naval
Operations stating that the repairments of the
atomic bomb had made it imperative that a program
of full-scale testing be undertaken. to
determine the effects of this type of bomb, both
underwater, above water, and against ships of
various types. This is on page 332.
It continued that the two bureaus would prepare
and present for consideration of the earliest
practical data testing program.
In a letter, On 16 October, Admiral E.J. King,
Commander-in-Chief of the United States Fleet
and the Chief of Naval Operations, recommended
the Joint Chiefs of Staff approve a test of the
atomic bomb against naval vessels. The Joint
Chiefs of Staff undertook the study of this
proposal. The Bureau of Ships was represented on
this subcommittee of planners, a joint staff
planners were appointed, and a planning
subcommittee under the chairmanship of Major
General Curtis LeMay, Army Air Force. The Bureau
of Ships was represented on this subcommittee by
Captain Alec Niskan, K-N-I-S-K-E-R, and head of
the design branch. The Secretaries of War and of
the Navy made the first public announcement of the
proposed test, and a joint press release on 10
December is on page 333. stating that the Army and
Navy contemplated a, quote, joint test of atomic
bombs against naval vessels, end quote. On 10
January 1946, the President approved the
recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. And
on 11 January, the Joint Chiefs of Staff created
Joint Task Force One, appointing Vice Admiral
W.H.P. Blandy, the Deputy Chief of Naval
Operations for Special Weapons, as his
commander. Admiral Blanding had already begun
specific planning for the two tests, starting
with consideration of various proposals for
target arrays drawn up by the Bureau of Ships. Page
334. The mission of Joint Task Force One was
publicly announced by its commander on 24
January, when Vice Admiral Blanding told the
Senate Committee of Atomic Energy, the mission of
Joint Task Force One is primarily to determine the
effects of the atomic bomb upon naval vessels in
order to gain information of value to the national
defense.
The ultimate results of the test, so far as the Navy
is concerned, will be their translations into
terms of United States sea power. Secondary
purposes are to afford training of the Army Air
Force's personnel in attack with the atomic bomb
against ships and to determine the effect of the
atomic bomb upon military installations and
equipment." He also announced that the atomic
bomb tests had been assigned the code name
Operation Crossroads. Now on page 335, some
exploratory discussions and organizations were
set up.
As the Bureau of Ships had a permanent interest in
Operation Crossroads, Admiral Cochrane
recognized his great responsibility, which were
devolved upon the officers elected to represent
the Bureau. Accordingly, he decided to appoint
Rear Admiral T.A. Sahlberg, head of the research
branch of the Bureau of Ships, as a senior member of
a large bureau group for Operation Crossroads.
Admiral Sahlberg had been a deputy member of the
Tolman Committee appointed by Major General
Leslie R. Groves in the fall of 1944, almost a year
before the Trinity test, and so forth. This
committee under the chairmanship of Tolman had
studied many suggestions. On 17 January, Admiral
Cochrane appointed Admiral Solberg to this
position because it was desirable to have someone
in his rank and experience coordinate all the
varied ones.
An order dated 22 January set up Code 180, the
Crossroads Section, and on the same day, Admiral
Solberg was designated as head of the section and
Captain Niskanen as his senior assistant.
Meanwhile, Admiral Sahlberg and Captain Niskan
consulted with Rear Admiral then Commodore W.S.
Parsons as to the relationship of Admiral
Sahlberg's group to the rest of the task force. In
the first organization chart prepared by the task
force, Admiral Parsons was shown as Deputy Task
Force Commander for Technical Direction, and
under him was the Technical Director, Dr. R.A.
Sawyer, S-A-W-Y-E-R, in charge of scientific
aspects of the tests, particularly the
preparation of the bombs and instrumentation to
measure their effects. and so on, and Admiral
Sahlberg received this overall technical
responsibility as, quote, director of ship
material assigned under Admiral Parsons.
It was agreed that all instrumentation would be
subject to the technical director's approval,
that's Dr. Sawyer, but that the director of ship
material, this is Admiral Sahlberg, would have a
major interest in problems involved in locations
of instruments on target ships and in their
installation as well as the results they gave with
reference to ship damage. It was therefore agreed
that the closest liaison between the technical
director and the director of ship material would
be necessary. It goes on to further describe the
organization. The heavy involvement of the
Bureau of Ships, which went beyond the target
ships themselves to include special interests in
electronics, oceanography, ship's
instrumentation, and explosion phenomena, made
the task of the director of ship material diverse
and complex. On the one hand, Admiral Solberg was
responsible for all the Bureau of Ships'
activities and operations crossroads,
including special projects like oceanographic
instrumentation, which was to be provided for the
most part in the water rather than on the target
ships themselves. On the other hand, he was
responsible for all target ships, as well as for
all materials and installations on those ships,
and for close liaison with the technical director
on all instrumentation problems affecting the
target ships.
Of interest, opposite page 338 is chart 30,
showing the director of ship material, 014, with
Admiral Sauberius, 014. Of interest are the
oceanography group, which is under Dr. Sawyer,
013, the oceanography group, 013B, and the ship's
instrumentation group, 013C, and the
electronics group, 013D.
quite an interesting chart. The Bureau of Ships
Group was quite an important group. The first
concern was that whole machinery and electrical
gear of almost 90 target ships plus reserve ships
ranging from landing craft to carriers and
battleships be placed in proper material
condition. It goes on to talk about
indoctrination of crews, electrical power, and
so forth, and says the 139 target must be equipped
not only to transport personnel and supplies, but
to provide laboratory space for scientific
groups in the study of oceanographic,
radiological, and other phenomena, and to
provide facilities for press and radio, as well as
manned surveillance and observers. That's on
page 344. Then after describing the preparation
of the target ships, on page 349, is a list of the
actual target vessels, which included the
Arkansas, the Pennsylvania, the Salt Lake City,
the two jet vessels, Nagato, Sakawa, and the
German Prinz Eugen, the dear old Saratago, and the
Independence, the famous old Lampson destroyer,
the Skipjack, the Sea Raven, the Tuna, and the
Skate. Many, many well-known wartime two ships.
Stop. Page 354 gives a full page from A through Y of a
check-off list of what had to be done to prepare one
of the target ships. On page 355, the preparation
of the 139 target vessels assigned to the task
force required conversion or modification
necessary to provide adequate accommodations
for more than the normal complement of most of
these ships. Office space and equipment were
essential for the administration work to be
carried on, and various technical groups
required laboratories and other scientific
facilities. Most of the work in conveying these
vessels offered no difficulty, apart from the
fact that very little time was available.
Additional communication facilities required
for operations and public relations were
provided. after showing how the organization
went on to teams to enter the harbor after the thing
for inspection now the after the fact on 360 it says
on 15 16 june the directorship material had
rehearsals for initial boarding teams which were
realistic in every detail the army air forces had
also been conducting independent drill with
bombing runs on nevada On 24 June, Queen Day, a
full-dress rehearsal was held on the exact
conditions of the actual Crossroads operations,
except that a 500-pound phosphorus bomb, a
fragmentation bomb, was substituted for the
eagerly-awaited atomic bomb. Weather forecasts
on 30 June indicated that the day selected for Able
Day, the 1 July, would be satisfactory. And at 9
o'clock on the morning of 30 June, the signal was
sent from Mount McKinley designating the
following day as Able Day. and setting in motion
the evacuation plan.
All vessels proceeded out of their sectors and
quarters for steam through the night, waiting
able to eat. On 1 July 1946, the first atomic bomb of
Operation Crossroads burst.
The operations in the McKinney area were
concluded on 25 August The Bureau of Ships group
arrived in San Francisco on 7 September,
reassembled in Washington, and officers
provided by the Bureau of Ships on 23 September to
undertake preparation of final reports. That's
page 362.
On page 364, the formation of the electronics
group is described in detail. On their important
jobs were the establishment of telemetering of
soldiers
and measuring the time pressurization of air
blasts, and I won't go into that, except they did
have to telemeter a lot of stuff. The interest of
oceanographers is that on page 369, early in
February after the oceanography group had
requested the use of television for measuring
wave heights, the electronics group organized a
television project. The initial project was
intended for remote observation of wave
formations only, with receiving equipment
installed on an aircraft and the image recorded by
motion pictures. When this project was well
underway, it became evident that the television
cameras also would provide a means of preserving
its other remote stations in the general area of
the explosion. Accordingly, another project was
set up. For wave measurement, two television
cameras and transmitters were installed on
Bikini Island on towers. The wave height was
indicated on two calibrated poles set up in the
water in the field of the television cameras. The
television equipment was standard naval design.
It required direct line of sight, so they made this
condition possible by installing television
receivers on two PBM-5 seaplanes, which also
carried automatic recording 35mm cameras. This
way it was possible to obtain a photographic
record of the wave heights on the calibrated poles
pictured in the field of the television cameras.
They also used sonobuoys and phallometers, two
sonobuoys operating on suitable frequencies,
were installed in Bikini Lagoon for the use of the
oceanography group and its wave measurements.
Twenty-five portable phallometers were
provided in the same program, some of them being
mounted in the lagoon on buoys, the others on
target ships. Provisions were made for auxiliary
power for the phallometers normally carried on
target vessels so that these could be used by the
oceanography group. Timing signals were
described on page 371. Navigational radar
readings, telemetering of Geiger counters.
There was a drone program. Test operations.
Instrumentation was a mutual thing, apparently,
with all the different organizations of the
Bureau of Ships Instrumentation Group. Option
page 378 is a chart of the Oceanography Group 013.
dash B. Of interest is the head of it, Commander R.
LaValle. The Oceanography Survey Section under
Lieutenant Commander C.A. Barnes. Wave
Measurement Section, Lieutenant Commander F.G.
Morris.
Many, many familiar names.
380. Oceanography Group Formation. On 13
December 1945, the Deputy Chief of Naval
Operations for Special Weapons conferred with
representatives of the Manhattan District, the
Hydrographic Office, and the Bureau of Ships
relative to surface water waves generated by
atomic explosions. In this conference, the
oceanographic facilities of the Bureau of Ships
and the Hydrographic Office were described for
representatives of the Manhattan District. The
group discussed ocean currents as they affected
the choice of a safe test site. and Bureau of Ships
Personnel outlined their program of wave studies
and instrumentation. The Oceanography Group is a
formal participant in Operation Crossroads with
the Bureau of Ships Commander Revell as head,
organized into two main sections dealing with
oceanographic surveys and wave measurements.
The first of these included four subsections for
radiological safety reconnaissance, physical
oceanography, biology, and geology. and
fisheries. The wave measurement section
included two subsections dealing with wave
motion and seismology. Specialty design was
maintained with other instrumentation groups.
Civilian personnel were drawn from many public
and private scientific agencies to assist in
planning and carrying out the technical work of
the group. Motionographic survey. Following the
exploratory discussions, the oceanography
group began active work not only in the technical
problems of wave measurement, but also in the
field of physical oceanography, biology,
geology, and fisheries. Every effort was made to
ensure that all cognizant government and
civilian agencies were represented. and that no
proper interests were neglected. Based to the
investigations in all four fields was the
decision to have Ballitz, that's the ship, make a
survey of the physical oceanography of Bikini
Atoll, for Ballitz eventually became the home for
a large number of scientists engaged in a
full-fledged scientific expedition, which was
an essential preliminary to the tests
themselves. The planning of the Ballitz
expedition was a major task involving many
different civilian scientific agencies. A
fiscal oceanographic survey was made to
establish the current regime and related
oceanographic conditions in Bikini Atoll and
surrounding waters, which would influence the
scattering and diffusion of radioactive
substances resulting from the bursts.
Commercial interests in the Pacific were
disturbed when the proposed test first appeared
in the newspapers over the possibility of
far-reaching harmful effects upon the
commercial fish supply. This is on page 381.
Accordingly, on 21 November 1945, the Secretary
of the Interior pointed out these dangers to the
Secretary of the Navy and rendered the technical
advice of the Fisheries and Wildlife Service in
the selection of a site where these dangers would
be least. Experiments and observations were made
to determine the effects of the bomb burst above
and at the surface of the reef and lagoon fishes of
Bikini Atoll and on the flood, phlogic, and
migratory fishes, particularly tunas, in the
surrounding ocean waters. The government
agencies which supplied personnel and equipment
pointed out the opportunity in Operation
Crossroads to acquire fundamental scientific
knowledge in many fields, including the effects
of concussion, wave action, the radiant effects
of heat, light, and radioactivity upon aquatic
organisms. They plan to measure... Now turn over
the tape to side four. Turn over this tape to side
four and continue. The discretion of...